Advisory: Turla group
exploits Iranian APT to
expand coverage of victims

Version 1.0
21st October 2019
© Crown Copyright 2019

About this document
This report provides an update to previous documents released by the NCSC on tools
used by the Turla group. It provides new information about their likely origins and use.

Handling of this report
Information in this report has been given a Traffic Light Protocol (TLP) of WHITE,
which means it can be shared within and beyond the CiSP community with no
handling restrictions.

Disclaimer
This report draws on reported information and NCSC investigations into Turla activity
in the UK alongside information shared by partners and industry sources. It has been
produced in collaboration and with the support of the United States’ National Security
Agency (NSA).

Page 2 of 6

Introduction
The Turla group, also known as Waterbug or VENOMOUS BEAR, is widely reported
to be associated with Russian actors. Turla uses a range of tools and techniques to
target government, military, technology, energy and commercial organisations for the
purposes of intelligence collection.
Previous advisories from the NCSC1,2 detailed Turla’s use of Neuron and Nautilus
implants and an ASPX-based backdoor alongside the Snake rootkit. This document
provides an update on the reported activity, with a particular focus on how those tools
were used in the period leading up to, and following, the publication of those
advisories.
Since those advisories were published, the NCSC, NSA and partner-shared analysis
of additional victims and infrastructure determined the Neuron and Nautilus tools
were very likely Iranian in origin. Those behind Neuron or Nautilus were almost
certainly not aware of, or complicit with, Turla’s use of their implants.
After acquiring the tools – and the data needed to use them operationally – Turla first
tested them against victims they had already compromised using their Snake toolkit,
and then deployed the Iranian tools directly to additional victims. Turla sought to
further their access into victims of interest by scanning for the presence of Iranian
backdoors and attempting to use them to gain a foothold. The focus of this activity
from Turla was largely in the Middle East, where the targeting interests of both
Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) overlap.
The timeline of incidents, and the behaviour of Turla in actively scanning for Iranian
backdoors, indicates that whilst Neuron and Nautilus tools were Iranian in origin, Turla
were using these tools and accesses independently to further their own intelligence
requirements. The behaviour of Turla in scanning for backdoor shells indicates that
whilst they had a significant amount of insight into the Iranian tools, they did not have
full knowledge of where they were deployed.
While attribution of attacks and proving authorship of tools can be very difficult –
particularly in the space of incident response on a victim network – the weight of
evidence demonstrates that Turla had access to Iranian tools and the ability to identify
and exploit them to further Turla’s own aims.

1
2

Turla group using Neuron and Nautilus tools alongside Snake malware, NCSC-Ops/35-17, 23 November 2017
Turla group update Neuron malware, NCSC-Ops/04-18, 18 January 2018

Page 3 of 6

Background: Neuron and Nautilus usage by Turla
The NCSC published two advisories on the use of Neuron and Nautilus tools by Turla
in late 2017 and early 2018. These tools were observed in use alongside Snake on a
number of victims.
Since publication of those advisories, further analysis by the NCSC, the NSA and the
wider cyber security community determined that Neuron and Nautilus tools were
present on a range of victims, with a large cluster in the Middle East. Victims in this
region included military establishments, government departments, scientific
organisations and universities. Some of these victims, but not all, also had a Snake
implant present.

Victim Overlap
Investigation into these victims identified that while some implants had been deployed
and administered from infrastructure associated with the Turla group, others had
previously been connected to by Virtual Private Server (VPS) IP addresses associated
in the open source cyber security community with Iranian APT groups.
Interestingly, in some instances, it appeared an Iranian APT-associated IP address
first deployed the implant, and later, Turla-associated infrastructure accessed the
same implant.
In order to initiate connections with the implants, Turla must have had access to
relevant cryptographic key material, and likely had access to controller software in
order to produce legitimate tasking.
In other instances, Turla deployed Neuron to victims in which they already had access
to via their Snake toolkit, with all observed connections from Turla-associated
infrastructure.

Scanning for backdoors
Turla also made use of existing Snake victim networks to scan for the ASPX
shell described in the initial advisory - attempting to identify the presence of,
and access, the ASPX webshell on IP addresses in at least 35 countries.
Commands were passed to the ASPX shell in encrypted HTTP Cookie values,
requiring knowledge of the cryptographic keys to produce valid tasking and
successfully interact with it.

Page 4 of 6

From one Snake victim, a log file was recovered which recorded the output of Turla’s
scanning for these ASPX shells with the strings “!!!MAY BE SHELL!!! (check version)”
and “!!!MAY BE SHELL!!! (100%)”; over 3500 unique IP addresses were scanned.
Once identified, Turla appeared to use these ASPX shells to gain an initial foothold
into victims of interest, and then deploy further tools.

Turla compromise of Iranian C2 infrastructure
Turla accessed and used the Command and Control (C2) infrastructure of Iranian
APTs to deploy their own tools to victims of interest. Turla directly accessed ‘Poison
Frog’ C2 panels from their own infrastructure and used this access to task victims to
download additional tools.
Reporting from Symantec3 details a specific victim in the Middle East where
Turla was observed delivering their own malware via a Poison Frog panel, which
Symantec and others in the cyber security community attribute to APT34 (also known
as OilRig/Crambus).

Turla compromise of Iranian Operational Infrastructure
The Turla group deployed their own implants against the operational infrastructure
used by an Iranian APT actor and used this to further their own accesses into the
Iranian APT’s global infrastructure.
Exfiltration of data from Iranian APT infrastructure to Turla infrastructure took place.
Data exfiltration from the Iranian infrastructure by Turla included directory listings and
files, along with keylogger output containing operational activity from the Iranian
actors, including connections to Iranian C2 domains. This access gave Turla
unprecedented insight into the tactics, techniques and procedures (TTPs) of the
Iranian APT, including lists of active victims and credentials for accessing their
infrastructure, along with the code needed to build versions of tools such as Neuron
for use entirely independently of Iranian C2 infrastructure.

Indicators of Compromise (IOCs)
As this advisory provides additional context around historical activity from the Turla
group, these IOCs are provided for completeness. They may be useful to any
investigator with historic data from a previous Turla (or Iranian APT) investigation. The
most effective way to mitigate the risk of actors exploiting these vulnerabilities is to
ensure that the affected products are patched with the latest security updates.

Page 5 of 6

Indicators for Forensic Analysis
The following indicators can be used to search for the presence of Turla activity
described in this document within forensic analysis tools.
!!!MAY BE SHELL!!! (check version)
!!!MAY BE SHELL!!! (100%)

Reporting to the NCSC
Any current activity related to these threats should be reported via the NCSC website
here where the NCSC can offer help and guidance.
The NCSC is also interested in receiving indicators of compromise and threat
intelligence, even if the activity has already been remediated

3

Waterbug: Espionage group rolls out brand new toolset in attacks against governments (blog post), 20 June 2019

Page 6 of 6

