Search

Search FireEye.com

Go

[FireEye]

-   Solutions

    Enterprise Security

    -   Helix Security Platform
    -   Verodin Security Instrumentation
    -   Network Security and Forensics
    -   Endpoint Security
    -   Email Security

    FireEye Expertise

    -   Expertise On Demand
    -   Managed Defense
    -   Threat Intelligence

    Security For:

    -   Cloud
    -   Financial Services
    -   Government
    -   Healthcare
    -   Industrial Control Systems

    VIEW ALL SOLUTIONS

-   Services

    Breach Response

    -   Incident Response
    -   Incident Response Retainer
    -   Compromise Assessment

    Security Assessment

    -   Red Team Assessments
    -   Penetration Testing
    -   Security Program Assessment
    -   Response Readiness Assessment
    -   Active Directory Security Assessment
    -   Tabletop Exercise
    -   ICS Healthcheck

    Security Enhancement

    -   Education and Training
    -   ThreatSpace Cyber Range

    Security Transformation

    -   Cyber Defense Center Development

    VIEW ALL SERVICES

-   Partners

    FireEye Partners

    -   FireEye Fuel Resellers
    -   Technology Partners
    -   Cyber Risk Partners
    -   Global Service Providers and MSSPs

    Partner Resources

    -   Partner Enablement
    -   Partner Portal
    -   Partner Education Center
    -   Partner Locator

    Partnering with FireEye

    -   Partnering with FireEye
    -   Become a Partner
    -   Partner Certifications and Accreditations
-   Support

    Get Support

    -   Contact Support
    -   Customer Portal
    -   Support Programs

    Find Answers

    -   Communities
    -   Supported Products
    -   Support Notices

    Documentation

    -   Documentation Portal
-   Resources

    Intelligence Briefing and Bulletins

    -   Annual Threat Reports
    -   Threat Intelligence Reports
    -   Threat Intelligence Reports by Industry
    -   Advanced Persistent Threat Groups

    Cyber Security

    -   What is Cyber Security?
    -   One Security Platform
    -   No. 1 Attack Vector – Email
    -   One Trusted Advisor for Expertise
    -   The Vision – Digital Magazine

    FireEye Blogs

    -   Read the FireEye Blogs

    Free Tools & Apps

    -   Free Software Downloads
    -   FireEye Market

    Training

    -   Education and Training

    VIEW ALL RESOURCES

-   Company

    About Us

    -   Why FireEye?
    -   Awards and Honors
    -   Leadership
    -   Board of Directors
    -   Investor Relations

    Customers

    -   Customer Success
    -   Customer Stories

    Careers

    -   Job Opportunities
    -   University Relations

    News and Events

    -   Newsroom
    -   Press Releases
    -   Webinars
    -   Events

    Contact

    -   Contact FireEye

To give you the best possible experience, this site uses cookies.  Find
out more on how we use cookies.

Accept

-   Home
-   FireEye Blogs
-   Threat Research
-   APT41: A Dual Espionage and Cyber Crime Operation

Threat Research {.category-name}
---------------

APT41: A Dual Espionage and Cyber Crime Operation {.blogpostlanding .red itemprop="headline"}
=================================================

August 07, 2019 | by Nalani Fraser, Fred Plan, Jacqueline O’Leary,
Vincent Cannon, Raymond Leong, Dan Perez, Chi-en Shen

Cyber Crime  
 China  
 APT  

Today, FireEye Intelligence is releasing a comprehensive report
detailing APT41, a prolific Chinese cyber threat group that carries out
state-sponsored espionage activity in parallel with financially
motivated operations. APT41 is unique among tracked China-based actors
in that it leverages non-public malware typically reserved for espionage
campaigns in what appears to be activity for personal gain. Explicit
financially-motivated targeting is unusual among Chinese state-sponsored
threat groups, and evidence suggests APT41 has conducted simultaneous
cyber crime and cyber espionage operations from 2014 onward.

The full published report covers historical and ongoing activity
attributed to APT41, the evolution of the group’s tactics, techniques,
and procedures (TTPs), information on the individual actors, an overview
of their malware toolset, and how these identifiers overlap with other
known Chinese espionage operators. APT41 partially coincides with public
reporting on groups including BARIUM (Microsoft) and Winnti (Kaspersky,
ESET, Clearsky).

Who Does APT41 Target?

Like other Chinese espionage operators, APT41 espionage targeting has
generally aligned with China's Five-Year economic development plans. The
group has established and maintained strategic access to organizations
in the healthcare, high-tech, and telecommunications sectors. APT41
operations against higher education, travel services, and news/media
firms provide some indication that the group also tracks individuals and
conducts surveillance. For example, the group has repeatedly targeted
call record information at telecom companies. In another instance, APT41
targeted a hotel’s reservation systems ahead of Chinese officials
staying there, suggesting the group was tasked to reconnoiter the
facility for security reasons.

The group’s financially motivated activity has primarily focused on the
video game industry, where APT41 has manipulated virtual currencies and
even attempted to deploy ransomware. The group is adept at moving
laterally within targeted networks, including pivoting between Windows
and Linux systems, until it can access game production environments.
From there, the group steals source code as well as digital certificates
which are then used to sign malware. More importantly, APT41 is known to
use its access to production environments to inject malicious code into
legitimate files which are later distributed to victim organizations.
These supply chain compromise tactics have also been characteristic of
APT41’s best known and most recent espionage campaigns.

Interestingly, despite the significant effort required to execute supply
chain compromises and the large number of affected organizations, APT41
limits the deployment of follow-on malware to specific victim systems by
matching against individual system identifiers. These multi-stage
operations restrict malware delivery only to intended victims and
significantly obfuscate the intended targets. In contrast, a typical
spear-phishing campaign’s desired targeting can be discerned based on
recipients' email addresses.

A breakdown of industries directly targeted by APT41 over time can be
found in Figure 1.

 

[]  
 Figure 1: Timeline of industries directly targeted by APT41

Probable Chinese Espionage Contractors

Two identified personas using the monikers “Zhang Xuguang” and “Wolfzhi”
linked to APT41 operations have also been identified in Chinese-language
forums. These individuals advertised their skills and services and
indicated that they could be hired. Zhang listed his online hours as
4:00pm to 6:00am, similar to APT41 operational times against online
gaming targets and suggesting that he is moonlighting. Mapping the
group’s activities since 2012 (Figure 2) also provides some indication
that APT41 primarily conducts financially motivated operations outside
of their normal day jobs.

Attribution to these individuals is backed by identified persona
information, their previous work and apparent expertise in programming
skills, and their targeting of Chinese market-specific online games. The
latter is especially notable because APT41 has repeatedly returned to
targeting the video game industry and we believe these activities were
formative in the group’s later espionage operations.

[]  
 Figure 2: Operational activity for gaming versus non-gaming-related
targeting based on observed operations since 2012

The Right Tool for the Job

APT41 leverages an arsenal of over 46 different malware families and
tools to accomplish their missions, including publicly available
utilities, malware shared with other Chinese espionage operations, and
tools unique to the group. The group often relies on spear-phishing
emails with attachments such as compiled HTML (.chm) files to initially
compromise their victims. Once in a victim organization, APT41 can
leverage more sophisticated TTPs and deploy additional malware. For
example, in a campaign running almost a year, APT41 compromised hundreds
of systems and used close to 150 unique pieces of malware including
backdoors, credential stealers, keyloggers, and rootkits.

APT41 has also deployed rootkits and Master Boot Record (MBR) bootkits
on a limited basis to hide their malware and maintain persistence on
select victim systems. The use of bootkits in particular adds an extra
layer of stealth because the code is executed prior to the operating
system initializing. The limited use of these tools by APT41 suggests
the group reserves more advanced TTPs and malware only for high-value
targets.

Fast and Relentless

APT41 quickly identifies and compromises intermediary systems that
provide access to otherwise segmented parts of an organization’s
network. In one case, the group compromised hundreds of systems across
multiple network segments and several geographic regions in as little as
two weeks.

The group is also highly agile and persistent, responding quickly to
changes in victim environments and incident responder activity. Hours
after a victimized organization made changes to thwart APT41, for
example, the group compiled a new version of a backdoor using a freshly
registered command-and-control domain and compromised several systems
across multiple geographic regions. In a different instance, APT41 sent
spear-phishing emails to multiple HR employees three days after an
intrusion had been remediated and systems were brought back online.
Within hours of a user opening a malicious attachment sent by APT41, the
group had regained a foothold within the organization's servers across
multiple geographic regions.

Looking Ahead

APT41 is a creative, skilled, and well-resourced adversary, as
highlighted by the operation’s distinct use of supply chain compromises
to target select individuals, consistent signing of malware using
compromised digital certificates, and deployment of bootkits (which is
rare among Chinese APT groups).

Like other Chinese espionage operators, APT41 appears to have moved
toward strategic intelligence collection and establishing access and
away from direct intellectual property theft since 2015. This shift,
however, has not affected the group's consistent interest in targeting
the video game industry for financially motivated reasons. The group's
capabilities and targeting have both broadened over time, signaling the
potential for additional supply chain compromises affecting a variety of
victims in additional verticals.

APT41's links to both underground marketplaces and state-sponsored
activity may indicate the group enjoys protections that enables it to
conduct its own for-profit activities, or authorities are willing to
overlook them. It is also possible that APT41 has simply evaded scrutiny
from Chinese authorities. Regardless, these operations underscore a
blurred line between state power and crime that lies at the heart of
threat ecosystems and is exemplified by APT41.

Previous Post

Next Post

Promotion

Subscribe

Share

Recent

RSS

[vision-promo-400x300]

Email Updates

Information and insight on today's advanced threats from FireEye.

Share

Recent Posts

-   03 Oct 2019

    IDA, I Think It’s Time You And I Had a Talk: Controlling IDA Pro
    With Voice Control Software

-   01 Oct 2019

    Head Fake: Tackling Disruptive Ransomware Attacks

-   30 Sep 2019

    The FireEye OT-CSIO: An Ontology to Understand, Cross-Compare, and
    Assess Operational Technology Cyber Security Incidents

RSS Feed: Stay Connected

Company

-   Why FireEye?
-   Customer Stories
-   Careers
-   Certifications and Compliance
-   Investor Relations
-   Supplier Documents

News and Events

-   Newsroom
-   Press Releases
-   Webinars
-   Events
-   Awards and Honors
-   Email Preferences

Technical Support

-   Incident?
-   Report Security Issue
-   Contact Support
-   Customer Portal
-   Communities
-   Documentation Portal

FireEye Blogs

-   Threat Research
-   Solutions and Services
-   Executive Perspectives

Threat Map

-   View the Latest Threats

Contact Us  

-   +1 877-347-3393  
     

Stay Connected

-   LinkedIn
-   Twitter
-   Facebook
-   YouTube
-   Podcast

Copyright © 2019 FireEye, Inc. All rights reserved. Privacy & Cookies
Policy | Privacy Shield | Legal Documentation

Site Language English

My preferred language:

-   English (English)
-   French (Français)
-   German (Deutsch)
-   Japanese (日本語)
-   Korean (한국어)
-   More languages

