Winnti: Attacking the Heart of the German Industry

Attacking the Heart of the German Industry {.glitch data-text="Attacking the Heart of the German Industry" data-observer="waypoint-1-header"}
==========================================

For a number of years now, a group of professional hackers has been busy
spying on businesses all over the world: Winnti. Believed to be
controlled by China. For the first time, in a joint investigation,
German public broadcasters BR and NDR are shedding light on how the
hackers operate and how widespread they are. — by Hakan Tanriverdi, Svea
Eckert, Jan Strozyk, Maximilian Zierer and Rebecca Ciesielski

Unser Bericht zur digitalen „Söldnertruppe“, die Industriespionage
betreibt.

[Chinese hackers sitting in a dimly lit room, in front of a screen.]

Malware:

Malicious software, like computer viruses or Trojans.

This investigation starts with a code: daa0 c7cb f4f0 fbcf d6d1. If you
know what to look for, you’ll find Winnti. Hackers who have been spying
on businesses all over the world for years. A group, presumably
China-based, has honed in on Germany and its DAX corporations. For the
first time ever, BR and NDR reporters have successfully analyzed
hundreds of the malware versions used for that unsavory purpose. The
targets: At least six DAX corporations, the stock-listed top companies
of the German industry.

Winnti is a highly complex structure that is difficult to penetrate. The
term denotes both a sophisticated malware and an actual group of
hackers. IT security experts like to call them digital mercenaries.
Since at least 2011, these hackers have been using malware to spy on
corporate networks. Their mode of operation: to collect information on
the organizational charts of companies, on cooperating departments, on
the IT systems of individual business units, and on trade secrets,
obviously.

Asked about the group an IT security expert who has been analyzing the
attacks for years replies, tongue in cheek: “Any DAX corporation that
hasn’t been attacked by Winnti must have done something wrong.” A
high-ranking German official says: “The numbers of cases are
mind-boggling.” And claims that the group continues to be highly
active—to this very day. The official’s name will remain undisclosed, as
will names of the more than 30 people whom we were able to interview for
this article: Company staff, IT security experts, government officials,
and representatives of security authorities. They are either not willing
or not allowed to speak frankly. But they are allowed to reveal some of
their tactics.

This allows us to find the software and to figure out for ourselves how
the attackers work. Thanks to the help received from the informers, we,
the reporters, are able to get on to the group. Part of their trail is
the following code: daa0 c7cb f4f0 fbcf d6d1.

Logging:

The hackers’ individual steps are stored in log files.

Modern-day espionage operations have one big advantage: Instead of
painstakingly planting agents in companies, digital spies are simply
sending prepared emails. Instead of taking pictures of confidential
documents while the rest of the staff is out to lunch, hackers can
remotely log on to company computers and send their commands from their
keyboard. But every hacking operation also comes with a huge drawback.
It leaves digital traces. If you notice hackers, you can log their every
step. The hackers themselves have no clue that they are under meticulous
scrutiny, sometimes even for months at a time.

To decipher the traces of hackers, you need to take a closer look at the
program code of the malware itself. It can be found in databases
operated by private companies like “Virustotal.” The company is owned by
Google and is a kind of malware search engine. The information stored in
that database is so valuable to IT consultants and security companies
that they pay thousands of Euros per month for accessing it. Anybody who
is unsure whether a mail attachment contains a Trojan can have it
checked in that database by more than 50 antivirus programs. In return,
Virustotal stores the file with the aid of a digital fingerprint. This
digital fingerprint allows others to search for the file and to analyze
the codes it contains. People like ourselves.

C:\Windows\system32\ wbem\system.dat 3047 ed57 acac 30c2 327e 7407 0b38
64b7

C:\Windows\system32\ wbem\system.dat 3047 ed57 acac 30c2 327e 7407 0b38
64b7

Every file has a digital fingerprint—which makes is clearly
identifiable.

In former times, it was solely the job of intelligence agencies to
uncover espionage operations. Nowadays, corporations and IT security
companies prefer to employ staff earning six-figure salaries for that
purpose. Their job is to search the corporate networks and Virustotal
for evidence of hacker groups. After all, it is the companies they work
for which are being spied on—and the companies’ secret formulas and
building plans warrant absolute protection. Professionally, these
employees are on a par with the security services. It is one of those
professionals who meets with us and hands us a piece of paper.

“This might help you find the hackers”, the gentleman tells us. He
believes that because they are spying on so many targets at the same
time, they have to figure out how to keep track. He also believes that
the hackers chose convenience over anonymity. We soon realize how
incredibly negligent the hackers are. We are working with Moritz Contag,
an IT security expert affiliated with Ruhr University Bochum (RUB). What
we find: The hackers are writing the names of the companies they want to
spy on directly into their malware. Contag has analyzed more than 250
variations of the Winnti malware and found them to contain the names of
global corporations.

Opsec:

Operational Security. It is a collective term for all the steps taken by
hackers to cover their tracks.

Hackers usually take precautions, which experts refer to as Opsec. The
Winnti group’s Opsec was dismal to say the least. Somebody who has been
keeping an eye on Chinese hackers on behalf of a European intelligence
service believes that they didn’t really care: “These hackers don’t care
if they’re found out or not. They care only about achieving their
goals."

The sheet of paper the staff member is showing us has a code printed on
it: daa0 c7cb f4f0 fbcf d6d1. We are looking for the same string of
characters in Virustotal, the gigantic database of infected files. And
we succeed.

daa0

C:

c7cb

\W

f4f0

in

fbcf

do

d6d1

ws

ffd7

\s

dcd5

ys

d3cd

te

c499

m3

99f0

2\

dacc

wb

cadd

em

edc1

\s

cac7

ys

c1d3

te

da96

m.

dddb

da

cfbc

t

bdbe

 

bfc0

 

c1c2

 

c3c4

 

c5c6

 

c7c8

 

999a

 

9b9c

 

eafc

wb

facd

em

c2cd

co

ceca

mn

8bc2

.d

cbc4

ll

a9aa

 

abac

 

adae

 

afb0

 

b1b2

 

b3b4

 

b5b6

 

b7b8

 

b9ba

 

bbbc

 

cec7

sy

ccb4

st

a4af

em

eda6

.b

aca8

in

c7c8

 

c9ca

 

cbcc

 

cdce

 

cfd0

 

d1d2

 

d3d4

 

d5d6

 

d7d8

 

f9fa

 

fbfc

 

fdfe

 

ff00

 

0102

 

0304

 

0506

 

0708

 

090a

 

0b0c

 

0d0e

 

0f10

 

1112

 

1314

 

1516

 

1718

 

191a

 

1b1c

 

1d1e

 

1f20

 

2122

 

2324

 

2526

 

2728

 

292a

 

2b2c

 

2d2e

 

2f30

 

3132

 

3334

 

3536

 

3738

 

393a

 

3b3c

 

3d3e

 

3f40

 

2521

dc

4344

 

4546

 

4748

 

595a

 

5b5c

 

5d5e

 

5f60

 

0603

ga

0e01

me

0309

fo

150f

rg

0c6a

e

6b6c

 

6d6e

 

6f70

 

7172

 

7374

 

7576

 

7778

 

797a

 

7b7c

 

7d7e

 

7f80

 

b1b5

07

b2b3

17

8586

 

8788

 

898a

 

8b8c

 

8d8e

 

8f90

 

9192

 

9394

 

Step 1: At the end of a Windows file we find the following code: daa0
c7cb f4f0 fbcf d6d1. This is the data stream in which Winnti hackers are
hiding their commands.

Step 2: It is a piece of cake to unmask the data. From this point, it is
easy to see what the hackers are up to. daa0 c7cb f4f0 fbcf d6d1
transforms into C:\Windows, a file path on the Microsoft operating
system.

Step 3: For the hackers to keep track of which network they are
currently invading, they simply write it directly into their program. In
the example shown herein, the Winnti hackers are inside the networks of
Gameforge.

Phase 1: Cybercrime {data-observer="waypoint-4-cybercrime"}
-------------------

It would seem that during the early stages, the hackers were concerned
mainly about making money. Gameforge is a case in point: a gaming
company based in the German town of Karlsruhe. During its heyday, the
company had a staff of 700 working hard at conquering the global gaming
market, and boasted annual sales to the tune of 140 million Euros.
Gameforge offers so-called “freemium” games. While playing the games is
free, those who want more either have to earn virtual money by
completing certain tasks, which takes a long time, or shell out real
money.

We are told that in 2011, an email message found its way into
Gameforge’s mailbox in Karlsruhe. A staff member opened the attached
file and unbeknownst to him started the hackers’ Winnti program. Shortly
afterwards, a few players became virtual rich persons.

The administrators became aware that someone was directly accessing
Gameforge’s databases and raising the account balance. They started
getting worried. How could this be happening? The technicians used the
next maintenance interval to reinstall the servers of the affected game.
The players didn’t have a clue about what’s going on. No sooner were the
servers back up than the manipulations continued.

Gameforge was using Kaspersky antivirus software, which didn't cause any
alarm bells to ring. Gameforge arranged for Kaspersky's IT security
experts to come directly to Karlsruhe. Because obviously there was
something weird going on. Nobody informed the State Bureau of Criminal
Investigation or the local police. The year was 2011, and many
investigators were barely familiar with the term or concept of
cybercrime.

[The passageway into a company’s network is often via malware hidden in
email attachments.]

While keeping an eye on Gameforge’s corporate network, the IT security
experts did find suspicious files and decided to analyze them. They
noticed that the system had in fact been infiltrated by hackers—who were
acting like Gameforge’s administrators most of the time. Which allowed
them to remain invisible. It turned out that the hackers have taken over
a total of 40 servers.

Persistent:

It is very hard to permanently remove the hackers from the network.

This mode of operation is typical of many hacker groups—and especially
of Winnti. “They are a very, very persistent group,” says Costin Raiu,
who has been watching Winnti since 2011. Raiu is in charge of
Kaspersky’s malware analysis team. “Once the Winnti hackers are inside a
network, they take their sweet time to really get a feel for the
infrastructure,” he says.

The hackers will map a company’s network and look for strategically
favorable locations for placing their malware. They keep tabs on which
programs are used in a company and then exchange a file in one of these
programs. The modified file looks like the original, but was secretly
supplemented by a few extra lines of code. From now on, this manipulated
file does the attackers’ bidding.

Winnti is very specific to Germany. It is the attacker group that's
being encountered most frequently.

Anonymous government official

Raiu and his team have followed the digital tracks left behind by some
of the Winnti hackers. “Nine years ago, things were much more clear-cut.
There was a single team, which developed and used Winnti. It now looks
like there is at least a second group that also uses Winnti.” This view
is shared by many IT security companies. And it is this second group
which is getting the German security authorities so worried. One
government official puts it very matter-of-factly: “Winnti is very
specific to Germany. It is the attacker group that's being encountered
most frequently."

Phase 2: Industrial espionage {data-observer="waypoint-5-industry"}
-----------------------------

By 2014, the Winnti malware code was no longer limited to game
manufacturers. The second group’s job is mainly industrial espionage.
Hackers are targeting high-tech companies as well as chemical and
pharmaceutical companies. We find evidence going as far as mid-2019.
Cases of espionage which were probably still ongoing when we discovered
them. Winnti is attacking companies in Japan, France, the U.S. and
Germany. Or more precisely: in Düsseldorf.

Most people probably know the DAX company Henkel as a manufacturer of
detergents and shampoos. But Henkel offers a huge range of other
products, including adhesives for industrial applications. Modern cars
are glued instead of welded. In a commercial on Youtube, Henkel shows
staff members successfully joining two metal plates with just three
grams of adhesive and then using the plates to pull a 280-ton train.
Nearly half of Henkel’s annual sales of 20 billion Euros are generated
by Henkel’s so-called “adhesive technologies".

The Winnti hackers broke into Henkel’s network in 2014. We have three
files showing that this happened. Each of these files contains the same
website belonging to Henkel and the name of the hacked server. For
example, one starts with the letter sequence DEDUSSV. We realize that
server names can be arbitrary, but it is highly probable that DE stands
for Germany and DUS for Düsseldorf, where the company headquarters are
located. The hackers were able to monitor all activities running on the
web server. And they also seemed to be able to reach systems which
didn't have direct internet access: Internal storage files and possibly
even the intranet.

The corporation confirms the Winnti incident and issues the following
statement: “The cyberattack was discovered in the summer of 2014 and
Henkel promptly took all necessary precautions.” Henkel claims that a
“very small portion” of its worldwide IT systems had been affected— the
systems in Germany. According to Henkel, there was no evidence
suggesting that any sensitive data had been diverted.

How we worked

BR and NDR reporters, in collaboration with several IT security experts,
have analyzed the Winnti malware. It was notably Moritz Contag of Ruhr
University Bochum who managed to extract information from different
varieties of the malware. Contag wrote a script for this analysis. You
can find it here. Silas Cutler, an IT security expert with US-based
Chronicle Security, has confirmed Contag’s analyses.

A collaboration between [Logo BR] and [Logo NDR]

Far from attacking Henkel and the other companies arbitrarily, Winnti
takes a highly strategic approach. Which is perfectly evident from the
other cases. Take Covestro, for example, also a manufacturer of
adhesives, lacquers and paints. This chemical corporation, a Bayer
spin-off, is now listed on the DAX. Covestro is regarded as Germany’s
most successful spin-off in the recent past. Up until June 2019, they
had at least two systems on which the Winnti malware had been installed.
Although there is no concrete evidence of data loss, Covestro considers
“this evidence of infection to be a serious attack on our company.”
Another manufacturer of adhesives, Bostik of France, was infected with
Winnti in early 2019.

The hackers behind Winnti have also set their sights on Japan’s biggest
chemical company, Shin-Etsu Chemical. We have in our hands several
varieties of the 2015 malware which was most likely used for the attack.
In the case of another Japanese company, Sumitomo Electric, Winnti
apparently penetrated their networks during the summer of 2016. And
consider Roche, one of the largest pharmaceutical companies in the
world: the sheer number of files, 25 in total, gives you an idea of the
degree of network penetration by the hackers. Winnti hackers also
penetrated the BASF and Siemens networks. Both corporations have
confirmed our research data.

A BASF spokeswoman tells us in an email that in July 2015, hackers had
successfully overcome “the first levels” of defense. “When our experts
discovered that the attacker was attempting to get around the next level
of defense, the attacker was removed promptly and in a coordinated
manner from BASF’s network.” She added that no business relevant
information had been lost at any time. According to Siemens, they were
penetrated by the hackers in June 2016. “We quickly discovered and
thwarted the attack,” Siemens told us in a written reply. Siemens claims
that even after detailed analyses, no evidence suggesting data loss from
the attack has been found to date.

Targeted companies

-   Gaming: Gameforge, Valve
-   Software: Teamviewer
-   Technology: Siemens, Sumitomo, Thyssenkrupp
-   Pharma: Bayer, Roche
-   Chemical: BASF, Covestro, Shin-Etsu

Bostik, Sumitomo and Shin-Etsu didn’t respond to our requests for
comments at all. Roche chose to keep their response neutral. A
spokesperson replied that “information security and data protection are
taken very seriously.” Nearly all major corporations now emphasize that
there is no such thing as one hundred percent protection. Hacking
attacks on large companies have become almost commonplace. And yet: No
company really likes to talk about having hackers in its own networks.
In many cases, customers are not informed. They are justifiably scared
of damage to their reputation.

Teamviewer is a case in point. A company based in the southwest of
Germany, a bona fide Silicon Valley contender, and a true showpiece
enterprise. It was quickly traded at a nine-digit valuation, the highest
accolade for a newly incorporated enterprise. Then came the Winnti
hackers. “Spiegel” magazine was the first to report about it.

The corporation offers a remote maintenance software solution which,
according to Teamviewer, is installed on two billion devices. To imagine
the mayhem a hacker might cause by infiltrating the end users’ devices
via the Teamviewer application—it boggles the mind. But things didn’t
get that far for Teamviewer, the company assures us. They add that they
replaced their entire IT infrastructure and spent millions on removing
the hackers from their networks in 2016.

The second way to find Winnti {data-observer="waypoint-8-second-way"}
-----------------------------

For the IT departments, the infected computers are extremely difficult
to detect. That is because a new variety of this malware remains
perfectly passive as long as it is left alone. How can you find
something that’s playing dead? Since 2018 there’s a public tool
available designed to systematically trawl the Internet for these
infected systems. This network scan works by luring the software out of
its hiding spot.

Company 3 Company 2 Company 1 Journalist workstationrunning scan
software $ ../nmap --scriptwinnti-detect.nse Found WINNTI>
XXX.202.182.31

Company 3 Company 2 Company 1 Journalist workstation running scan
software $ ../nmap --script winnti-detect.nse Found WINNTI >
XXX.202.182.31

Each company has its own IP address range. The IP address is a
computer’s unique address. This is how computers can be reached via the
Internet.

Once the Winnti malware has infected a computer, it initially behaves
passively. Winnti is now waiting for control commands.

With the aid of special software we send requests to different company
networks. The software per se is harmless, but capable of simulating
control commands designed to lure Winnti out of hiding.

In all cases where Winnti was installed, the malware will respond to our
request. This tells us: That company has been hacked.

Have you kept count?

So far, ten companies have been affected, most of them in Germany.

This tool hit pay dirt at Covestro and Bostik. Many IT companies are
taking the same route to find Winnti infected computers; some of the
results have been leaked to us—in the strictest confidence. Thanks to
this tool, we found out back in March 2019 that the Bayer pharmaceutical
group had been hacked by Winnti.

The tool was written by staff of Thyssenkrupp, because the industrial
giant—company number eleven—had been spied on by Winnti. In 2016, the
corporation allowed a reporter from “Wirtschaftswoche” to watch the
attackers being pushed back. The magazine later wrote of a “six-month
defensive battle.” The hackers had succeeded in extracting small data
sets of importance for the construction of plants. The company mentions
“data fragments” and believes that the hackers have missed their actual
target, tapping into the corporation’s research results.

The trail leading to China {data-observer="waypoint-9-china"}
--------------------------

At Gameforge, the Winnti hackers had already been removed from the
networks when a staff member noticed a Windows start screen with Chinese
characters. Presumably, the hackers were using tools in their native
language, which would have made their work easier. But they forgot to
cover up their tracks. Just another mistake they made, one of many.

In October 2016, several DAX corporations, including BASF and Bayer,
founded the German Cyber Security Organization (DCSO). The job of DCSO’s
IT security experts is to observe and recognize hacker groups like
Winnti and to get to the bottom of their motives. In Winnti’s case, DCSO
speaks of a “mercenary force” which is said to be closely linked with
the Chinese government. They have been tracking the group for a long
time: “We can, based on many, many indicators, say with high confidence
that Winnti is being directed by the Chinese.”

We can, based on many, many indicators, say with high confidence that
Winnti is being directed by the Chinese

Dror-John Röcher, DCSO

Many of the experts we talked to believe that the group is operating out
of mainland China. “I don’t care if the hackers work in green uniforms
or are commissioned by people wearing green uniforms,” says an IT
security expert, alluding to a suspected proximity to the country’s
military intelligence service.

It would seem that in the early days, Winnti hackers were still quite
careless. One of them left many traces on the Internet. In 2013, the
Kaspersky team was able to follow clues in their code. This is how
Costin Raiu and his colleagues came across a person using the alias
“Mer4en7y.” This individual was active in hacker forums where he
commented in Chinese on a job offer for recruiting hackers. There was
mention of a “powerful background.” “And ‘Mer4en7y’ replied that the job
was too far away for him, but that he was in full support of the work,”
says Raiu.

On 30 October 2018, the US government brought charges against ten
Chinese nationals. Two of them are believed to be working for one of
China’s intelligence services. Hackers are charged with spying on a
manufacturer of gas turbines. Also charged in connection with the crime:
“Mer4en7y”, who is believed to have been acting on behalf of the
intelligence service and to have used the Winnti software for the hack.
IT security experts attribute the cyberattack to a different Chinese
group. But the charges filed are testimony to the close links between at
least one Winnti hacker and the government.

[Excerpt from the US indictment against Mer4en7y]

The US government is accusing the individual going by the alias Mer4en7y
of using the Winnti software

Janka Oertel of the German Marshall Fund of the United States (GMF) in
Berlin has been keeping a close eye on China. Oertel considers it “very
unlikely that large-scale cyber operations could be happening without at
least parts of the Chinese party-state knowing about them.” Oertel, a
political scientist, emphasizes that China wants to play a “significant
market role” in key industries such as materials research by 2025 and to
dominate the world market by 2035. “In some of these areas, however,
China has not yet managed to achieve its goals without technology
transfers—including transfers from Germany,” Oertel adds.

A government official familiar with the hacking cases agrees: “Cyber
incidents allow us to draw conclusions as to a nation’s true
priorities.” The point, he believes, is to understand one’s own industry
and to figure out what cannot be produced fast enough. The missing
materials are then procured by hacking operations.

But a former staffer of a European intelligence agency warns: “If I
wanted to hack anyone right now, I’d make it look like a Chinese group.”
He warns against underestimating the proficiency of hackers working for
governments. After all, he says, laying false trails is their job.

People working for the German intelligence agencies tell us that,
although all current findings suggest that Winnti originates from China,
much of the evidence is based on data that is several years old. “We
have a knowledge gap for the past two to three years,” says one
individual familiar with the incidents.”

If I wanted to hack anyone right now, I’d make it look exactly like a
Chinese group.

Former staffer of a European intelligence agency

While Germany does address industrial espionage in direct talks with the
Chinese leadership, these attempts are considered a waste of time.
“Fruitless,” says one individual who knows how these meetings work. The
other side denies everything, he says, and what’s left at the end of the
day are meaningless declarations of intent. And the Germans are hesitant
to provide concrete evidence—for fear of revealing to the Chinese
leadership what they know— for example, from the work of the Federal
Intelligence Service (BND).

[Dark server room]

The BND is trawling the internet for specific groups of attackers. The
agency received 300 million Euros to set up a powerful surveillance
system, among other things. The idea is to find hacker groups suspected
of being government backed and likely to cause damage to the Federal
Republic. There is also talk of starting an “intelligence offensive”
against Chinese groups of attackers. This means: Hacking into the
networks. Spies watching spies.

Political espionage? {data-observer="waypoint-10-politics"}
--------------------

Corporations like Bayer, Covestro, Roche and Bostik share a single
common denominator: the chemical sector. However, analyses also show
that a number of targets now affected are deviating from the known
pattern. We are talking about the possibility of political espionage. We
have come across several indicators corroborating this suspicion.

The Hong Kong government was spied on by the Winnti hackers. We found
four infected systems thanks to the network scan, and proceeded to
inform the government by email. They confirm our findings: “Recently, it
was found that six Internet facing computers of two government
departments returned positive results from a test for Winnti malware.”
The affected computers did not contain any classified information or
citizens’ personal data, and there was “no evidence” that any data have
been copied out, we are being told.

The network scan also sniffs out a telecommunications provider from
India, which happens to be located precisely in the region where the
Tibetan government in exile (the “Central Tibetan Administration”) has
its headquarters. Incidentally, the relevant identifier in the malware
is called “CTA.” A file which ended up on Virustotal in 2018 contained a
pretty straightforward keyword: “tibet”. The CTA didn’t respond to our
requests for comment.

Podcast (in German): How we deciphered the code

On top of this there are campaigns which don’t seem to make a lot of
sense unless you consider political espionage. Take Marriott, the hotel
chain based in Maryland, USA. The corporation manages more than one
million rooms worldwide. While Marriott hotels may be state-of-the-art,
who would want to hack Marriott for cutting-edge technologies or
innovative ideas? Who would want to spy on the Indonesian airline Lion
Air for the same reasons? Probably nobody. But hotels and airlines
collect data. If you know how to access these data, you know where
people travel and where they spend the night. And if you also hack into
telecommunications companies you know where these people are located at
any given time. The Winnti hackers managed to penetrate the networks of
Lion Air and several telecommunications companies, and they at least did
take Marriott into their sights. We have the relevant coded file in our
hands.

When reached for comment, the German government tells us that the
security authorities have established “multiple platforms and discussion
groups” for that matter. If required, affected companies can request
“appropriate advice and assistance for cleaning up their systems and
further prevention.” In July 2019 the Federal Office for Information
Security reached out to a company, whose name was included in a Winnti
implant. We were told that “generally speaking foreign intelligence
agencies have established cyberattacks as a vital mode of acquiring more
information.” According to the government, these hackers usually don’t
have to fear political or economical risks, “due to various obfuscation
methods."

The German government’s response is elusive, when asked whether there is
a connection between the Winnti hackers and the Chinese Government. They
tell us that cyberattacks are taken seriously, no matter who is
responsible. We reached out to the Foreign Ministry of China and the
embassy in Berlin with this and other questions. We didn't hear back.

Related stories (in German):

[Logo Tagesschau.de]

Tagesschau.de:Industriespionage: Mehrere Dax-Firmen von Hackerangriff
betroffen

[Logo Funkstreifzug]

Der Funkstreifzug:Hackerangriffe auf deutsche Dax-Unternehmen

[Logo Plusminus.de]

Plusminus:Deutsche Unternehmen stärker im Visier von Industriespionen
(Mai 2019).

About the project

“Winnti: Attacking the Heart of the German Industry” is a joint
investigation by Bayerischer Rundfunk (BR Recherche/BR Data) and
Norddeutscher Rundfunk.

Published on 24 July 2019

Reporters: Hakan Tanriverdi, Maximilian Zierer, Rebecca Ciesielski (BR),
Svea Eckert, Jan Lukas Strozyk (NDR)  
 Contributing: Maximilian Richt (BR)  
 Editors: Uli Köppen, Verena Nierle, Robert Schöffel  
 Illustrations: Anna Hunger  
 Digital design: Steffen Kühne  

[Logo BR24]

Impressum | Datenschutz | Bayerischer Rundfunk 2019
